well the US is trying to shore up
support for a ceasefire deal between
Israel and Hamas proposed by President
Joe Biden last month it is putting this
latest draft to the UN Security Council
for more on this let go now to Gabrielle
alzando who is at the United Nations
Headquarters in New York and Gabe do we
have any idea of what is actually in
this draft
resolution yeah we've seen the draft and
uh we know exactly what's in it this
draft resolution we are being told now
uh is going to go up for a vote in the
security Council around 19 or 20 GMT
that's 3 or 4:00 New York time around
that time for him when the security
Council convenes in the afternoon now
this us draft resolution is just a
little longer than a page long and it
really is comes in three parts if you
will part one of this uh resolution
calls for a ceasefire immediate
ceasefire release of captives
particularly women elderly and wounded
in exchange for the release of some
Palestinian prisoners held in Israel it
calls for the Palestinians to be allowed
to return to their homes including in
the north and calls for a ramp up of Aid
including housing aid uh for
Palestinians that no longer have a home
to go back to after stage one uh this
resolution draft resolution by the US
calls for a permanent IND hostilities uh
in exchange for the release of all the
remaining captives and the full
withdrawal of Israeli forces and then
the third stage is a multi-year uh
reconstruction plan for Gaza now the big
question is uh the first stage it lays
out 6 weeks uh for that first stage to
be implemented if it is not implemented
within 6 weeks uh they say that this
will continue on uh this uh plan will
continue on as long as negotiations to
implement stage one continue on as well
now we caught up with the uh us Deputy
ambassadors he was here at the UN about
an hour ago and this is what he had to
say about this draft resolution we
expect to be voted on later on
Monday this proposal is the best
opportunity we have right now to bring
at least a temporary Hal to this
fighting uh to be able to get um more
assistance in get hostages released and
all the other things are included in the
proposal so we want to work hard to get
that done and this proposal Al gives us
the best opportunity to do that yes
there'll be differences of opinion on
you know which side wants this and which
side wants that but overall this
proposal I think is the best realistic
opportunity we want to put pressure on
Hamas to accept this deal uh so far it
hasn't uh accepted this deal so that's
why we want to have this resolution
because we think right now we're on the
you know uh we're on the cusp of doing
something very very important and so we
want to see it done and that's why we're
working so hard to try to get everybody
on board Israel has informed normally
accepted it either even though it's
supposedly their Israel's accepted the
deal it's Hamas Hamas needs to accept
this
deal now we don't want to speculate on
what's going to happen with this vote
later on Monday but it's clear that
Russia and uh China have expressed some
concerns about previous language and
previous drafts uh they've said in the
past that it should be an unconditional
ceasefire full stop uh not tied to
anything else uh and that's spend the uh
opinion and the view of Russia and China
and some other Security Council Members
as well quite frankly uh we did catch up
with the Russian Deputy Ambassador she
was walking into a meeting here at the
UN earlier this morning as well we asked
her as her country reached a decision on
this draft resolution she said basically
no comment you can imagine that there's
probably uh talks going back and forth
between Moscow and New York between uh
the Russian Mission as we speak so we do
not know how this vote will go but
clearly uh this will be a very important
vote that we expect here at un
headquarters later on Monday and
certainly is we will be keeping a very
close eye on how that plays out that is
Gabrielle alzando for us there in the UN
thanks so much well more on this we're
going now to Thomas Pickering who is a
former US ambassador to the UN Jordan
and Israel he joins us from Washington
DC thank you very much for being with us
sir uh first of all you seem like the
perfect person to talk to right now as
we wait for this uh draft resolution to
be put forward by the United States will
this go the same way as we've seen the
others go and be VTO how do you think
it's going to play
out it's a great question and thank you
for having me on and at the moment there
is enough
uncertainty about how this would come
out to say that we're in a classic
situation the security Council where in
fact we have increasing confidence that
we can bring along the
vetos uh that are at this point
Potential from either Russia or China or
both or the alternative is that they
will have to bear the responsibility for
interrupting a process that at the
moment seems to offer one of the few
hopes for an end to Carnage in the
region the rebuilding of stability the
protection of human life the return of
host and the release of any the stakes
are large uh in effect using the
security Council as a leverage point is
a risky proposition but not one that has
been abandoned by the US in the past
with mixed success so I say keep your
eye on this space anybody who tells you
they know how it's going to come out is
to be listened to but skeptical about
indeed as well as being an ambassador to
the UN Jordan and Israel also understand
you the former ambassador to Russia they
obviously will play a very crucial role
here what do you make of how or how do
you believe that they might vote
here I think it's very difficult to tell
they're guarding their public record on
how they're going to vote on this uh in
the past at Good Times in the security
Council uh we wouldn't have taken a
resolution to a vote without assurance
that we would not face a veto in bad
time which is certainly characteristic
of what we have to do now between the US
and Russia for a whole host of reasons
it is hard to know and I've sketched out
for you how and in what way the council
might be used as a leveraging question
in order to in effect uh separate Russia
further from the International Community
uh should they produce a veto at this
particular stage and cast the
responsibility uh for the death and
destruction and humanitarian danger that
they might lead to certainly on Moscow I
want to um just turn now to the other
big diplomatic move over the last few
hours uh with the US Secretary of State
Anthony blinkin who has just landed in
Israel we heard from him as he left
Cairo he said Hamas continues to show
extraordinary cynicism quote basically
blaming them for a lack of a deal what
did you make of uh of those comments in
particular and how helpful are they in
actually trying to get a deal across the
line I think there was some hope that
Egypt could play a more useful forceful
role in bringing Hamas along along with
Qatar where Hamas resides in one form or
another uh blinken uh the secretary has
made it L clear that he did not reach a
success in bringing Hamas along uh the
resolution Security Council I think had
as its initial purpose if it could be
passed a further leveraging Point
further pressure on Hamas and further
indication that if we can't get that
through persuasion and diplomacy we can
get it through security Council action
and perhaps international support for
the uh plan that president President
Biden unruled yeah just going back to uh
the proposed vote uh at the UN Security
Council later today I mean is it
relevant at all because we've seen uh so
so much division within uh the UN
Security Council in recent
times especially compared with uh the
general assembly which has so far backed
ceasefire deals pretty much from the
very beginning of this war is it
relevant this vote in the next four or 5
hours
the simple answer to that question is
general assembly resolutions are kind of
advisory Security Council resolutions
put together in a particular
framework uh of the language are seen to
be mandatory and people who are members
of the security Council are obliged to
accept him others believe everybody is
obliged to accept them uh I have in one
way or another attempted in your with
your question s to deal with the issue
of if a resolution is not mandatory can
it still reflect influence of the
International Community and in the
general assembly if there is a very
large majority then countries move at
their Peril because maybe the next step
will be sanctions and other kinds of
steps taken uh further to pressure those
who are hesitant like Hamas at this
stage to join in the resolution Hamas
has a problem of course it wants a
permanent ceasefire now uh the The
Proposal proposes in stage two something
that moves very close in that direction
but it counts on a accurate completion
in six weeks of stage one before you get
there so solving those differences has
not been possible obviously in the
negotiating framework at least in so far
as we can tell now uh whether they will
be resolved before uh 3 4:00 this
afternoon eastern time is uncertain but
as I said the US has two options in
pursuing a resolution uh one to get a
mandatory resolution successfully and
use that as a pressure point the second
is to get uh enough support uh even if
one or a number of the permanent members
veto the resolution uh both to shift the
blame on those individuals but also to
use as much of the unanimity as they can
uh to conin
Hamas that it's time to go along like
you say we will be keeping a very close
eye on how things unfold over the next
four or five hours that's Thomas
Pickering former US ambassador to the UN
Jordan as well as Israel thanks so
much make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from alaz